Chris Hill
Japanese Poetry

Themes of Issa through Lexicographic Analysis
One of the things that bothered me about our study of Japanese poetry this semester was the practice of drawing broad conclusions from a curated and small set of data. Poets who had written thousands of poems were ascribed motivations and themes on the basis of maybe ten or twenty items. It would be bad science to draw conclusions from a biased and small sample size in any other field, why should poetry be an exception? Having written over twenty thousand haiku, Issa's case is particularly egregious. With a sample size of ten thousand English translated Issa haiku, I will attempt to analyze some predominant themes in the poetry of Issa. The data used in this analysis comes from the "haikuguy" Issa haiku archive. All poems were translated by the same author, David G. Lanoue. I've run the raw text of the poems through a word frequency analysis and interpreted the results. The program that I used for this analysis is AntConc, developed by Laurence Anthony, a professor at Waseda University.  I've removed common words like "the, and, I, etc" to catch the signal in the noise. How do the observations from class stack up against the data and my interpretation? 
It is important to note that I make no claims that this technique will yield all that there is to see in Issa. What it can do is: to quantify what a poet wrote about the most (and one could argue what they cared about the most), identify patterns that human beings cannot easily identify, and to be used as evidence to substantiate observations and arguments. It is quite possible that there is some aspect of Issa that cannot be picked up through simple word choice and word clustering. If there is, this technique misses it. For example, perhaps although a poem focuses on or uses low-frequency words, it embodies a meaning that many other "low frequency" poems embody. Imagine one thousand such poems all conveying a similar theme or meaning that cannot be gleaned through simple word choice.  There are many things that can be done to improve on this kind of study especially given the resource and time constraints present. Words that are equivalent in meaning can be combined to increase the overall frequency of the word. Doing this sort of combination may propel some words/meanings into the top ranks that are not currently present. In the future, a more deep probing using some sort of machine learning system or sentiment analysis can yield results that a human mind may not be able to pick up on at all.
 An assertation made was that a key aspect of the haiku was a focus on nature, and that Issa like other prominent haiku poets followed this trend. In the case of Issa at the least, the data overwhelmingly confirms this. Our top four words by frequency: blossoms, rain, spring, and mountain all relate to nature. Eighteen of our top fifty words relate to the non-biotic aspect of nature, that is, the Earth as the Earth itself. Blossoms, rain, spring, mountain, moon, cherry, winter, plum, autumn, summer, field, tree, snow, wind, grass, bamboo, pine, and blossom. This number increases to twenty-three if we include animals; cuckoo, butterfly, nightingale, cat, and geese. Almost half of the top fifty are related to nature using this broader definition. It would seem then that Issa is no exception to the nature rule of haiku. 
Focusing on our number one word blossoms, is there anything that we can learn from the context in which it appears? One of the features of AntConc is that it can not only show you frequency but clusters as well. That is a word or words that immediately follow a specific word. For blossoms, our two top-ranked clusters are: "blossoms scatter" and "blossoms fall" Having read all of the haiku in which these phrases appear my opinion is the following. For one, it's clear that Issa views the act of the blossoms falling as a beautiful thing: "cherry blossoms scatter/even the devil in me/has lost his horns" " "cherry blossoms scatter/even the clay Saigyo/looks merry" blossoms scatter/even the devil/sheds a tear"cherry blossoms scatter/a nightingale sings/I cry" 
On the other hand, it seems that Issa likes to tie the act of blossoms falling to the transient nature of life, perhaps even using them directly as a metaphor for the act of dying: "even the rice grinders/stop singing/cherry blossoms scatter" "a wife, a child/foretelling my fate?/"blossoms scatter too" "simply trust!/cherry blossoms fall/pit-a-pat" Combining these two interpretations we come to the conclusion that Issa views the cherry blossoms as beautiful while recognizing and placing emphasis on the fact that they are a fleeting and temporary thing. In fact, it may not be in spite of the transient nature that Issa finds value in the cherry blossom but because of it. This lines up perfectly with the classical Japanese aesthetic of wabi-sabi.
Perhaps the most interesting word that appears in our sanitized top ten list is first. First is a rather common word, and has multiple uses as an adjective, adverb, and noun. At a glance, it shouldn't come as a surprise that it would feature as one of the most common words. However, looking at the haiku in detail, over 95% of the four hundred plus uses of the word are as an adjective describing a noun; first snowfall, first rain, first water. One such example: "first firefly/the sky over Kyoto/is smoggy!" To compare, there are only a scant thirty-two mentions of second compared to first's four hundred and forty eight. It is clear then that Issa places importance on the virginal experience, granting it a special status no other enumerated experience receives.  A first of something can be viewed as the act of coming into existence, a birth. It is interesting to note then, the contrast between "cherry blossoms scatter" which suggests the finality of death, and the various firsts of Issa's other haiku which instead suggests the beginning of life through birth. Through this serial position effect, Issa's haiku highlights the beginning and end of a lifespan rather than any intermediate point.    
It is important to note that I make no claims that this technique will yield all that there is to see in Issa. What it can do is identify predominant themes present in what Issa saw fit to write about the most. Through my interpretation of this analysis, the main themes present in Issa's haiku are the following: nature, transience, and firsts/birth.  